In my career, there's been a thousand
times where I've met somebody who is
deeply ambitious, where they want to
achieve great things, even just big
things, but they get constantly held
back because they doubt themselves. And
the secret that nobody tells you is that
there are very successful people. I work
with some of the most successful people
in Silicon Valley and they all have
doubt too. The only difference is that
they listen to that signal, the signal
of doubt and they know what to do with
it rather than to let it stop them.
These are the two places typically where
the doubt arises. One is just when
you're thinking about living into it and
the other one is when you get a reaction
that you don't particularly want. The
first one is you're handed a project or
you have a project that you want to
start and you get excited about it.
You're, you know, thrilled maybe a
little But you're like, "Woo, let's do
this project." And then you put some
ideas together. You sit with the ideas
and then doubt shows up. The second
place where doubt typically arises is
then you put it in front of somebody.
Maybe it's your boss or maybe it's an
investor or maybe it's your husband and
you put this idea out. You make a
presentation or you just talk about it
and you see that they aren't completely
bought into the idea. So in either case,
what's happening is that you have an
ambition, which means you want to move
something forward and you're scared that
there's going to be a feeling that
arises in you that you don't want to
feel. And the doubt is coming up as a
way to protect you from that feeling.
And typically there's two ways in which
that happens.
It is a feeling from your past that you
don't want to relive. And the second one
is that there's a feeling of maybe in
failure or an accomplishment of that
ambition which you're scared will rock
you. And so in either case, whether it's
a a feeling that's from your past or
whether it's a feeling that you
potentially will feel. They're both
emotions that you're trying not to feel
which are creating that doubt. So, let
let me explain to you how that works and
then also show you a trick in a bit
that's going to allow you to prove to
yourself that this is about emotions.
And it's really not about the logic that
your doubt is telling you it's about.
So, the first one, the the one about
feeling something from your past, the
way it happened for me was my dad would
just criticize me all the time. So,
maybe it was because he drank too much
the day before or his blood sugar was
bad or maybe because he didn't
understand what I was doing. and I would
say something, oh, here's my idea, and
I'd get criticized for it. Or maybe he
would even get angry at me for it. And
as a kid, what you think is, oh, if I'm
being criticized, I must have done
something wrong. What do I do to fix it?
What did I do wrong?
And so, that's the doubt. That's where
the doubt comes from. And you can see
this all the time. There are some people
that I see some executives and whenever
anybody gets angry at them, they go
right into doubt. or if somebody's
critical of them, they go right into
doubt instead of saying, "Oh, wait,
maybe how much do you understand the
whole thing?" Or, "Uh, right." So, they
don't get it, but most people don't get
it. It's a new idea. That makes sense.
They don't do any of that stuff. They
just boom, go into doubt because they
don't want to feel that friction because
that's what they learned as a kid is
that if I am feeling that friction, it
means I must have done something wrong
and what do I do to adjust? The other
way that we go to doubt that we don't
want to feel it is, okay, I'm going to
do this thing and I might fail. Oh my
gosh, I'm going to feel horrible about
myself. I don't want to feel horrible
about myself, so I'm going to go into
doubt or I might succeed. And then the
person who I think I am, the person
who's struggling, I won't be that person
anymore. I'll be the person who's
actually winning. And though a big part
of my system wants it, there's also a
part of me that's scared. Like, will I
lose my ambition if I'm winning? Will I
lose the people who love me? Will I be
the tall puppy that gets cut if I'm
winning? And so there's lots of reasons
that you can have a fear of success or a
fear of failure and that brings up
emotions that you don't want to feel.
And so you go into doubt because what
the doubt is doing is it's slowing your
ambition. So you're not going to have to
feel the thing. You're not going to have
to take the risk of having somebody get
angry at you or somebody criticizing you
or feeling like you're the tall poppy or
feeling like you're a complete failure.
And so you just have doubt and then that
slows the process down and then you
don't do the thing and you don't have to
feel that. The only thing you have to
feel is disappointment with yourself
which typically you're used to feeling.
You've been feeling it for years. So
that's the safe bet. And so that's where
you go
right about now. What's happening is
like, "No, Joe, this isn't about feeling
an emotion. I actually just don't know
if something is right or something is
wrong. So let's talk about why that
isn't true.
Why it's not true is because you don't
know if it's right or wrong. You you
cannot know if you're right or wrong.
How could you? You haven't done the
thing before. If you've done the thing
before, you knew how to do it. There
would be no doubt. You also would have
already felt all the emotions you would
have to feel for doing the thing, right?
You've done it before. You felt the
thing before. There's no issue. So, it
must be that you don't actually know the
answer. And of course, you don't know
the answer. There's no way that you can
know how to do anything perfectly. they
do it the right way. The only thing that
you can do is just do it and then do it
better and then do it better and iterate
and learn and grow. That's the only way
this gets done. But all of that stops if
you are worried about feeling a certain
way. If you have doubt, then you stop
the iteration. You stop the process.
So the only way to get to intellectual
clarity is to actually do it. You can
take your best guess, but you're going
to fail sometimes. Everybody fails
sometimes if they're doing anything of
significance. And intellectually you
know that but you're still being
stopped. And that's why we know it's an
emotional thing. But the other way we
know it's an emotional thing. It's about
avoiding an emotional state is that when
you learn what to do when you're
avoiding an emotional state and you see
that it brings you to clarity, boom, it
becomes very clear. If you can say, "Oh,
I can't wait for somebody to criticize
me." The doubt goes away. If you say, "I
can't wait to feel like a failure." The
doubt goes away. If you say, "I can't
wait to feel that massive success,"
the doubt goes away. And so, let's do an
experiment that shows you exactly what
I'm talking about. So, there's this
great quote, and I think it is from
some place in South America where it
basically says, "Doubt is the sin of the
heart." So, what does that mean, doubt
is the sin of the heart? It means that
your heart has to be closed to have
doubt.
So heart closed means that we're
defending against something. And in this
case, we're defending against an
emotion.
So if you open your heart and then you
go into the thing that you have doubt
about,
something different happens. So before
we go there, a lot of people are going
to be thinking, "What do you mean open
your heart, Joe?" Think about it like
this. Think of something that you just
love, that you just adore. Maybe it's a
puppy or a kid or a person
or a place or a tree. Just something
that just makes you feel h I love being
in the presence of this thing.
And that is what it means to open your
heart. And so your job is to love being
in the presence of the thing that's
creating doubt. So if you open your
heart to the doubt and just sit there.
So let's go ahead and do it. You open
your heart to the thing that you're
doubting. So, pick a moment, pick a
thing in your life right now that you
have doubt around,
anything. And then put your hand right
there on your heart. So, you're
remembering. It's just to help you
remember to open your heart. Drop the
defense
and look at that thing, that doubt, that
thing you're doubting. Look at it the
way that you look at that kid or that
puppy
just with that. welcoming that openness.
Take a deep breath in. Really drop the
defense. Open your heart.
What happens to the doubt? Where does it
go?
So immediately what we see is that as we
open, as we welcome,
the doubt starts drifting away. And we
might not know everything to do in that
moment, but we know the next step.
You know right now what the next step is
because you opened your heart to it.
And if you don't, you know that you'll
know the next step if you sit there with
an open heart long enough,
right? Because you're welcoming it. So
that's how it works. But in the long
term,
it's really important to feel the actual
emotion that you're avoiding
to really feel what is it like? Oh, to
have somebody angry at me. How do I
welcome that?
to have somebody criticize me or be
passive aggressive. How do I welcome
that? To have my boss go, "No, you're an
idiot." How do I welcome that?
And there's intellectual ways to do
that. There is, oh, every time I'm
triggered, I know that there's something
that is holding back my freedom. And I
can actually love being triggered. And I
actually love being triggered because I
know, oh, on the other side of that
trigger, if I do the work, I'm going to
find freedom. So, of course, I love it.
It's like finding the beginning of a
gold mine. I have to do a little
digging, but man, if I know that there's
gold down there, I'm going to take it.
And so, how do you really love the fact
that you find this thing that you don't
want to feel? Because you know, if you
can enjoy feeling it, there's going to
be a lot more freedom in your world. So,
there's the intellectual way of doing
it, but the other way to do it is to do
something that we call emotional
inquiry. We have a whole podcast on it.
We have an exercise that you can
download on it. You can just look below
where you're bringing wonder where
you're bringing just that childlike
excitement and curiosity to the
emotional experience. So you're
literally what does it feel like in my
body? How do I how do I play with this
thing? Is it dense? Is it what color is
it? How does it move? What's the
sensation of the emotion? where you're
really bringing that wonder, that deep
wonder into the emotional experience so
that you can start really learning how
to welcome it. Because the thing about
emotions generally is that if you resist
the emotions, they're really
uncomfortable. It's like resisting going
to the bathroom. It's really
uncomfortable. Going to the bathroom,
not so uncomfortable. Feeling the
emotion, not so uncomfortable. It's
really simple. Or you can also
intellectually just see that it could be
really exciting to welcome this
emotional experience. And so if you are
in doubt,
you can open your heart.
Make sure that you're not committing a
sin of the heart by closing your heart
and allowing yourself to accept any kind
of emotional experience that you're
having, which really means accepting
yourself as you are.
[Music]